Nature-Based Solutions as Tradition in India: Lessons for Water Sustainability in the Peri-Urban"
Authors: Singh, N. & Shreya, S. | Journal: Water (MDPI) | Published: March 2025
The strength of NBS traditions for water management lies in their integrative, systemic nature, which can be seen as holding immense promise from a water sustainability perspective. A number of traditional NBSs (such as dugwells, stepwells, ponds, tanks, and spring sources) have been an integral part of rural as well as urban water supply systems, also bringing several co-benefits such as flood mitigation, drought resilience, and biodiversity. A complex web of factors has gradually interfered with their existence and well-being as discussed, but there definitely lies a way forward.
Some important lessons to learn from this paper in this regard are summarized here. First and foremost, the value of TEK-based NBSs for addressing water challenges in peri-urban settings is enormous. Hence, every effort should be made to integrate these principles and practices for water management in peri-urban India. Second, since TEK is a place-based science, any NBS tradition to be integrated for this purpose should be adaptive to the local environmental settings, such as eco-climatic, biophysical, and hydrological aspects. Third, the very nature of being localized further implies the need for adaptiveness within the given social, cultural, economic, and political contexts. Thus, any policy promoting adoption of NBS traditions for peri-urban water management must be based on the principle of decentralization. Fourth, depending upon the nature and extent of the water-related challenges in the problem context, attempts should be made to customize the traditional NBS forms for maximum output. Fifth, in order to ensure that the revived NBS traditions thrive and develop, appropriate institutional structures and organizational routines will need to be innovated and applied. Finally, given a scenario of increasing water demands in peri-urban settings due to rapid population rise as well as changing water-use patterns, the effectiveness of TEK-based NBSs that generally operate in small-scale settings may be questioned. In order to address such possible limitations, innovative solutions that combine NBS traditions alongside the conventional water management approaches are implied.
In order to enhance the integration of TEK-based NBSs for managing water challenges in peri-urban India, their alignment with existing policies in the country is essential. The National Water Policy (2012) outlines a common integrated perspective to govern the planning and management of water resources, considering local, regional, and national contexts and to be environmentally sound [71]. Within the scope of the policy, Jal Shakti Abhiyan, which was a water conservation campaign launched by the government in 2019, already focused on the theme “Catch the Rain—Where it Falls When it Falls” and aimed to cover all the blocks of all districts (rural as well as urban) across the country. Rainwater harvesting, renovation of traditional water bodies, and watershed development have been important components in this campaign. Water-related NBSs are further supported by several programs and schemes on protection and improvement of green covers that includes the National Afforestation Program and Green India Mission [72]. Thus, a sound policy background already exists. What is needed is a clear focus on the water-related challenges in the peri-urban sector, and a blue-plan for addressing these through integration of context-based, water-related NBS traditions.
The recommendations arising from this study closely align with the Global Standard for NBS promoted by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) for enhancing the effectiveness, sustainability, and adaptability of NBS interventions [73]. According to this practical framework, comprising eight important criteria, the NBS should be designed as a response to a societal challenge that has been identified as a priority by those who are directly affected by the challenge (i.e., the stakeholders) (Criterion 1). Furthermore, the NBS design should be informed by their knowledge about the interactions between different aspects of the landscape using a three-scale framework that considers not only the concerned landscape itself but also among its various parts and the wider environment around it (Criterion 2). Also, the NBS intervention must afford opportunities for the stakeholders to engage with and participate in its design and implementation, advocating clearly to uphold their own rights and interests (Criterion 5). Furthermore, the NBS should be managed adaptively based on evidence, which draws on scientific understanding as well as indigenous, traditional, and local knowledge. Finally, the NBS design, implementation, and lessons learnt should be shared for upscaling and mainstreaming to trigger transformative change (Criterion 8).
Within the scope of the national policy framework and the IUCN Global Standard, the TEK-based NBS forms outlined in this paper are functionally valid in need of time in the contemporary peri-urban Indian context. These must be comprehended as essentially flexible entities with the potential to integrate skills, insights, and innovations from other knowledge systems and practices. TEK-based NBSs must therefore be increasingly integrated into policy and practice for creating resilient, sustainable responses to current peri-urban water crises within a climate change regime.
